In this lesson we're going to talk about two more types of data structures for storing a lot of data
at the same time.
The first one that we're going to look at is called a data frame.
In This lesson's resources you'll find included some fresh data.
Let's upload this data to our Jupiter notebook.
So change the tabs to your M.O. projects folder and then click upload and then pick the LSD underscore
math underscore school underscored data dot see as we file again you'll find the CSC file in the lesson
resources after you've chosen this file click upload and then head back into your Jupiter notebook here
we're going to write the following code right.
Import pandas as PD and then we're gonna use pandas to read our CSB file and we're going to store that
information in a variable called data so we'll write data is equal to PD dot read underscores scores
as V parentheses single quotes and then the file name LSD on a school math on school on a school data
dot c s v as you're writing this make sure you don't have any typos in the file name all the capitalization
and the spaces matter of course let's at shift enter and see what we get what we're looking for the
stage heart no errors now that we've done that we can take a peek at our data variable so let's print
it out let's print out data and we can do that by writing print and then within the parentheses we'll
put data
and what you should see at this stage are seven rows and three columns now just like our lists and our
arrays are data variable here is holding onto this collection however the super neat thing here is the
structure of this data we've got our data structured in both rows and columns rows and columns boys
and girls our spreadsheet monkey's dream about at night.
Now as a challenge can you find out what the type of this data variable is.
I'll give you a couple of seconds here's the solution we'll write to type provide our variable hit shift
into and then we get the full name data is of type panda stopped cool dot frame dot data frame so the
type of this variable is not in and it's not float and it's not an array nor is it a list it is of type
data frame and that's how we'll be referring to it we'll be referring to it by the short name and the
shortening is the last bit at the end of this long name in terms of lingo no programmer would say it
is of type data frame they'll simply say this variable is a data frame this is the kind of language
that you'll hear people use when they're referring to types as we've said before you can think of a
data frame as a collection but with a clearly defined structure the data inside a data frame is structured
in rows and columns just like an Excel spreadsheet and data frames are super common in Python and you'll
see data frames being used in many many places so it's a good idea to learn a couple of the tricks and
a couple of the things that we can do with data frames for example we can grab a single column by providing
the column name where before we were providing the index for a list or an array so if I write data open
square brackets I can put the column name between some single quotes inside these square brackets See
I take the third column and I write average underscore math on the score test underscore school when
I hit shift enter Jupiter a notebook will display to me that data inside the single column.
I guess I want to bring your attention to the fact that the python syntax is very very similar between
lists and arrays and data frames.
However instead of providing the position or the index between the square brackets here with specifying
a column name.
But again typos are hard.
Something that we have to be very much aware of when we're doing this because if we have a typo in our
column name and we're trying to fetch a column that doesn't exist.
So if I delete the E and a press shift enter will get a error in this case.
It is a key error and you can see that this key error brings up a whole bunch of other errors.
In short Python can't find this location in our data frame.
This is why we have to pay a lot of attention to our spelling.
We get the same error when we try to retrieve data from a data frame.
If we treat it like a list or like an array.
So if we were to put an index here for say data square brackets 1 we also get a key error.
So even though Python handles the data types behind the scenes and they're never really explicit in
your face with the syntax this is another example where you want to be aware of what type of data you're
working with what type is my variable because that will determine what kind of instructions you can
give to your code.
Let me fix this error now so we can bring up our column.
Just gonna hit control Z or command Z to undo his shift enter.
Now let me show you how to save this data that we're extracting the single column in a variable to store
this column in a single variable.
All we have to do is provide a variable name say only math scores and can't spell and set it equal to
data square brackets.
And then the column name if we hit shift enter at this point our output will disappear.
But to prove to you guys that this data is indeed stored in this variable we can print it out.
So I'll write print only math scores and had shifted and taken.
There we go extracting data from a data frame is pretty useful and we've seen how to get a single column
out of a data frame.
But what happens when we want to say I don't know.
Add a column instead.
This is a good thing to know since very often you'll be combining different kinds of data frames or
different kinds of data in your python code into a single table if you will.
Remember how we selected a column bytes name from the data frame we use the name of the column between
the square brackets.
Let me copy this entire line and paste it in the cell below.
Now you'll also remember when we tried to grab a column that didn't exist we got an error.
So if I tried to store the values of test subject inside only math scores and had shift enter would
get our key error but if we change things around in the cell and we move data square brackets test subject
to the left hand side of the equals sign and we provide a value on the right
we are giving python a completely different instruction if I hit shift and to now our Python code runs
without a problem.
And that's because we are saying add a new column with the name test subject and set all the rows equal
to Jennifer Lopez
let's print out our data frame and see this in action.
Here you go.
Now we have four columns and all the rows in the fourth column have been set equal to the value.
Jennifer Lopez.
So this is how you can add a new column to an existing data frame let's talk about how to manipulate
the values of a column.
This is very very useful.
If we were to do calculations on all the values in a single column at the same time for example let's
create a new column called high score and then set the values of that column equal to 100.
So I'll write data which is the name of our data frame.
Square brackets single quotes high score and set it equal to the number one hundred can hit shift into.
I can print out my data frame.
Take a look at it now.
And here we see that high school on my 13 inch screen here shifts down and is displayed a little bit
below.
But it's still just the fifth row in the data frame.
Now as a challenge see if you can figure out how to add all the values in the average test score column
to the values in the High Score Column.
In other words overwrite the values that are currently stored in the high score column so that the equal
100 plus whatever is inside the column for the average test scores
hand here's the solution using the notation that we know so far.
We would set the existing high score column equal to
the current value stored in high score plus
the value stored inside the average math test score
and went out of print statement below this as well so that we can see what it looks like.
Hit shift enter and here we go.
Hold arrows inside the high score column have been updated to be equal to 100 plus whatever was stored
inside the average math test score column.
So when we look at this piece of code right here we can see that this pattern is actually the same one
that we've encountered previously in the fourth cell down from the top.
When we set my age is equal to my age plus 1.
In this case we were also using the current value of my age doing a calculation with it and then overwriting
the value stored inside the variable with this new value and this is exactly what's going on in this
line to.
So now that we know how to add two columns together what if we wanted to say square the values inside
this high score column as a challenge.
Can you figure out how to update the data frame so that the values inside the high score column are
squared.
In other words we'll want to multiply 178 by itself and then do the same thing for every other value
in each row in this column.
I'll give you a few seconds to figure this out and here's the solution.
We simply set data high score is equal to data high score Times data square brackets high school
if we print our data frame out now we'll see the values updated in this column as follows now there's
other ways you can do this calculation of course we don't have to stick to this particular syntax you
can also write the python code in this way.
So instead of writing the name of the column at the very end you could have written it with two time
signs and then the number two.
And this raises the values inside the rows of this column to the power of two.
If you had a single multiplication sign it would just be multiplying all the values by two.
But if you have two multiplication signs it would be raising them to the power of two.
So now our data frame has five columns.
It's got the time delay in minutes.
It's got LSD parts per million.
It's got the average math test scores.
It's got a test subject and a high score.
Previously we've extract that a single column and stored it in a variable called only math scores in
these lessons.
I've been harping on and on about data types.
Would you like to venture a guess what the data type is for only math scores.
What category does this variable belong to.
Well let's check it out.
Let's write type only math scores that shift enter and there we see the type of this variable the full
name of the type.
Specifically this variable is of type pandas dot core dot series dot series.
Now you might look at this and you might think it's a little odd right.
Because the type of our data variable is data frame and previously we were working with lists and even
arrays and yet when we extract a single column from this data frame we end up with something of data
type series.
Now there is no need to panic.
A series is actually very very similar to an array.
But there are a few differences which is why a series is a different category from an array.
For example the key difference is that a series is always always only one column.
It had only has a single dimension.
It cannot be a matrix like an array or a list.
A series is much much more restrictive.
Also a series can have an attribute like a name you'll actually see this attribute when we printed out
only math scores turn here.
You'll see that the name is basically the column heading.
Now some of you might be asking themselves why why are you telling me this why is this interesting and
why does it matter.
Well by checking up on these data types we've actually just made a discovery we've made a discovery
about the nature of data frames a panda's data frame is essentially made up of a collection of series.
Each column in the data frame is a series average math school is a series test subject as a series every
single column is a series and together they make up a data frame and this brings us to a point where
we've talked about quite a few different kinds of data structures.
We've introduced you to arrays lists data frames and series and we know that a data frame is made up
of series and we also know that a series can only have one column of data while a data frame in contrast
has two dimensions because it has both rows and columns now say instead of pulling out a single column
as a series from our data frame say we want to extract another data frame from our data frame.
So we want to create a smaller data frame from our existing data frame.
How would we do that at the moment.
We've got data inside five columns and we want to create a data frame that only consists of say two
columns.
Say we're only interested in the LSC parts per million and the average test scores.
How do we construct this subset.
Well first let's create a list of the columns that we care about.
Do you remember how to do that has a challenge.
Can you create a list called columnists and put two pieces of data inside of it.
Put the LSD parts per million header and the average math score column header inside this list variable
here is the solution.
Right columnist equal to square brackets and then single quotes LSD on a school pen comma.
Single quotes average math test score and that's it.
We've just created a list consisting of two strings.
Two column heading names.
Now we're gonna use this list to create a new data frame.
I'm going to call this data frame.
I don't know.
Clean data and set it equal to data square brackets.
And then inside the square brackets I'm going to pass the columnist so instead of writing the name of
every single column that I care about inside these square brackets I just provided a list of column
names and if I print out my clean data data frame I can see what it looks like.
It's just a data frame with two columns.
Now we've actually written some Python code in two lines that we could have done in a single line.
We've split out the steps where we created a list and then created a data frame using that list.
Oftentimes you'll see both of these steps done in a single line.
So we could theoretically copy this piece of code here.
Our list of column headings and just put it inside here put it inside the square brackets of our data
frame.
Now I can comment on this line because we don't need it anymore.
And if I press shift enter we'll actually get exactly the same result.
So what we've done here is simply nested a list inside another piece of code.
The reason I'm showing you this is because oftentimes when you see two square brackets just next to
each other like this it can look really really scary but all it is is a list inside of something else
when we're writing our code like this.
We're not creating an extra variable.
We're not creating this column list variable.
We've accomplished the same thing by providing the list of strings directly to prove to you that we
have indeed created the data frame.
Let's print out the type of clean data.
And here we see that it is indeed a data frame.
Now what if we wanted to create a single column as a data frame data frame.
After all it doesn't need to have many many columns could have a single column just as well.
And this is actually something that's very very useful when running regressions with Cyclone.
For that we actually want to work with data frames instead of series.
We're gonna be interested in predicting the math test scores.
So in this case we can write lowercase Y is equal to data square brackets and then square brackets again
because we're going to be supplying that list and all we have to do is write the name of the column.
We're still passing in a list here but in this case it's a list with only one item.
And when do we check the type of y by writing type parentheses y we can see that Y is indeed a data
frame.
If we weren't passing in a list and instead only had one pair of square brackets we are passing in a
string.
And if I re-evaluate this cell then the type for Y would be a series.
So this is an important point when we provide a list to our data frame.
We get out a data frame and when we provide a string to our data frame we get out a series.
So this is another example when running Python code that it's important to keep in mind the data types
that you're working with.
Even though it's happening in the background as a quick exercise can you create a variable called Capital
X and set it equal to the LSD parts per million values.
Also make sure that X is indeed a data frame print the values of x and show the type.
I'll give you a few seconds to figure this out and pause the video and here's the solution.
You'd write capital X is equal to data square brackets and then square brackets again so that we get
a data frame out and then we provide the column name which was Ellis the underscore APM to print the
value.
We simply write print parentheses capital X and to show us the type we'd write to type parentheses x
hitting shift enter.
You should see this.
We should see that X is a data frame that consists of a single column namely the LSD parts per million.
Excellent.
So we've done a lot of work with data frames at this point.
We've seen how to add columns extract columns and manipulate the data inside a column.
Let's talk now about how to delete a column that we added to a data frame after all.
Having read this scientific study from 1968 I discovered that Jennifer Lopez did not in fact sit for
any arithmetic tests to delete a column from a data frame.
We used the python keyword DL short for delete and we followed this by the name of the column that we
want to get rid of.
In this case the column name is test subject so we'll write DL square brackets.
Single quotes test underscore subject and then below.
Let's print out our data frame just to see if we have indeed gone from five columns to four.
And as you can see our test subject column has been removed.
So as a quick exercise can you delete the high score column from our data.
Data from you've probably guessed that it's the same pattern as in the cell above we write it.
DL data square brackets.
Single quotes and then high underscore score let's print out a printout data below as well so we can
see that the column has indeed been removed.
Good work.
I'll see you in the next lesson.